---
title: Do I really want to be a professor?
date: 2025-02-14
---

## A totally unncecessary history lesson

Okay, well, why is this my first question? Well, because someone asked me
wheever I started writing this, so it's what's on my mind. I've been meaning to
write a github pages webpage for a long time, and if someone had asked me, "Why
are fish so colorful?" maybe that would have been the first question. Accidents,
happy and sad, tend to set us on our journeys more often than careful planning.

Am I professor by accident? Maybe! In high school, like some percent of
students, I was in the gifted program. I don't think it helped me. Most of the
benefit was getting more flexibility to pick and choose my classes. But at one
point, near graduation, the gifted facilitator told me, "One day you're going to
have a PhD." I didn't believe her. I didn't even want a PhD. And yet, now I have
a PhD.

In college, another accident. The professor for my intro to physics course was
looking for undergraduates to join his lab. At the end of the semester, when
everyone sensible had already investigated and gotten into the labs of their
choice, this fell on my lap. It was in an experimental liquid-surface
interaction lab, and it didn't take too long for me to discover that I'll never
be an award-winning experimentalist. Fortunately, I discovered a passion for
writing research software. Also, I ran into someone doing interesting work who
had come from the University of Texas physics department.

And that's how I ended up as a graduate student in a physics department, working
towards my PhD.

At that point, did I want to be a professor? Still no.

But I learned that I liked teaching undergraduates.

While teaching a lab class, I threw in a few bonus questions that used
programming to use more sophisticated models and get better results. This lead
to a few students convincing me to teach an impromptu scientific programming
course in my spare time. It was lovely!

Also, I found out that my first choice for a research advisor was not taking on
new students. So I had to improvise a bit. (When they suggest that you reach out
to professors who you want to work with for your PhD, this is one reason why.)
The petroleum department had lots of computational problems to solve and was
always in need of physicists, so I started a project there looking at molecular
dynamics simulation of flow through nanopores. Then my professor said, "Why
don't you take this project? It isn't too difficult, but it will fund you and it
will be good for you to get familiar with real data." From that day forward, I
was a reservoir engineering researcher.

At that point I had my research problem and I knew I liked to teach. Then it
took 5 years to get my PhD, which led to a post-doc another post-doc, and some
navigating the twists and turns of academia towards faculty. Let's talk about
that some other time.

## The future

This is a long and roundabout way of saying that I've followed the path to be a
professor. I have the academic pedigree; I've seen the good, the bad, and the
ugly; I _identify_ as an academic. But, to get back to the central question, do
I really want to be a professor? Yes. Why? Because nothing brings me greater joy
than to spread knowledge. I love the look people get in their eye when they
finally understand something they've been struggling with.

Yes, you can spread knowledge in industry. Industry has other advantages, too:
higher pay, faster feedback, better work-life balance, easier flow. But academia
has a high density of the things I like best: freedom, students to teach, good
people who like philosophical discussions. It's a fun, flexible job. I get to
work on problems that I find exciting and watch people learn!

So yes, I really want to be a professor.
